What We Do

Academics: “Education is the most powerful weapon which you can use to change the world.” Believing in the merits of this quote by Nelson Mandela, PBX facilitates and encourages its members to achieve excellence in their academics. Our Chapters strategically pick housing near campus libraries, our members often combine their notes and study together, and senior members will pass down their old notes, study guides, and knowledge to younger members. In doing these, PBX provides an educational advantage to its members not enjoyed by outsiders. We are known to graduate with honors and go on to pursue advanced degrees in business, law, and science.

Social: As a social organization, our Chapters responsibly host and attend house parties, basement parties, lawn parties, band parties, pig roasts, seafood boils, formals, semi-formals, reunions, anniversaries, and mixers with sororities and women’s sports teams and clubs. Our social events are often in correlation with our philanthropic efforts, such as when we have a pig roast and invite the community to come and donate to our sponsored philanthropy organizations. 

Philanthropy: Philanthropy is a powerful way to positively influence the world. As such, PBX supports numerous philanthropy organizations to help the less fortunate and advance honorable causes. We do this by hosting fundraisers, collecting donations from parents and alumni, and raising awareness for our sponsored organizations. Our causes and organizations include cancer research with the Jimmy V Foundation, building strong youth with the Boys and Girls Club, supporting our veterans with the Wounded Warrior Project, and more. Because PBX promotes Chapter freedom and individuality, each Chapter chooses their own organizations to support. 

Community Service: Our Chapters are proud and loyal members of their communities which we enjoy every opportunity to give back to. Our community service initiatives include adopting neighborhood streets to keep clean, cooking for the homeless, being mentors for the Big Brothers Big Sisters organization, volunteering at local schools, fostering animals, hosting barbecues for emergency responders, building homes with the Habitat for Humanity organization, and hosting donation drives. Every community is unique, so each Chapter chooses their own community service initiatives to be most helpful to their specific community.

Entrepreneurialism: Fraternity life is a constant collaboration between like-minded individuals with similar ethics and ambitions. This environment appeals to driven and hard workers, and it spurs unique and progressive ideas which often turn in to entrepreneurial initiatives born right out of the Chapter house. Furthermore, running a Fraternity is great practice for running a business as it teaches you how to create and manage a budget, enforce a risk management policy, interface with school and public officials, lease and manage real estate, build and market your Chapter’s brand, recruit new members, compete with other organizations, manage an insurance policy, maintain a legal entity, stay in good standing with the IRS, and more – an outstanding educational experience not replicable in a classroom.

Athletics: PBX competes in numerous athletic venues both on and off campus. Our members play on school teams, club teams, community teams, inter-fraternity league teams, and on sorority-fundraiser teams. We also host our own athletic events as fundraisers for our philanthropy and community service initiatives. Additionally, our Chapters often sponsor local children’s teams and coach them as well.

Bhood: PBX is a Brotherhood unlike any other. Shared experiences and time-spent-together are what create the bonds of a strong Brotherhood. To build these bonds, each Chapter has a Brotherhood Committee which plans events and outings to get their members together and having memorable experiences. Brotherhood events can include things as simple as ordering pizza and watching sports at the Chapter house, bowling, river tubing trips, and paintball. They can also include things as grand as camping trips, rafting through the Grand Canyon for a week, heli-skiing trips, and international travel.  

Networking: A great benefit of PBX membership is being in a broad but tight network of Brothers from all Chapters, their alumni, and their families. This network can be utilized to collect donations and investments, to find summer lodging during an internship, to review resumes, to apply for jobs, to find friends in a new city, to partner with on a startup, etc. Our members also network with sororities and the rest of Greek Life, women’s school and club sports teams, and other school organizations such as the school newspaper and student government. Outside of school, we network with City Councils, community service and philanthropy organizations, political and civil rights organizations, and more. In short, our members meet and work with a lot of people, and our alumni like to help out their successors.

Fundraising
Pledgeship

Chapter Resources

By-Laws are the rules which govern a Chapter and its members. They give leadership positions their power, specify how members can vote, explain how to ratify a budget, say how to transfer leadership, and much more. Chapter By-Laws are like the Constitution of a Chapter. When opportunities or problems arise, you consult the By-Laws for resolution. As such, it is very important for each Chapter to have clear, concise, and thorough By-Laws. This document is our By-Laws for new Chapters. These By-Laws may be amended and updated per the rules set forth within.

Each Chapter has several leadership positions for its members to fill. There are Executive Board positions like President and Treasurer, Committee positions like Brotherhood Committee Chairman and Recruitment Committee member, and one-man positions such as Chapter Historian and House Manager. Every position is important and tantamount to a Chapter’s ability to reach their full potential. This document is a list of the common leadership positions (you can create one not on this list) and their responsibilities.

Committees are what allow every single member to be a leader and contribute directly to their Chapter’s success at any time. There are the Brotherhood, Recruitment, Social, and Scholarship committees to name a few. Each committee has a Chairman and multiple committeemen. The Chairmen are elected and the committeemen are any members which wish to serve. Some Chapters mandate that every member be on at least three committees at all times. Being an effective committeeman is a great way to show your leadership potential and step towards higher positions. This document explains each Committee and how to make them successful. 

The Points System is a way to establish seniority between members within the organization. This is helpful to resolve disputes such as who gets the best room in the house, who gets the last spot on the trip, etc. Some members are older, but other members have held more positions, and others have better grades, so it can be tough to establish a clear hierarchy. The Points System rewards leadership experience and academic performance, and it penalizes riskiness. Like the By-Laws, it can be amended to best suit each Chapter.

The Fraternal Information and Programming Group (FIPG) Policy is PBX’s definitive risk management policy. Its purpose is to make our experience a safer one for all of our members and guests. It establishes rules and practices to prevent physical and psychological harm, and to protect us from liability risk. It addresses topics such as alcohol consumption, drug use, hazing, assault, hosting events, fire prevention and property safety, responsibilities of Chapter leaders, and the education of new members. This document describes the history of FIPG, why it is needed, the policy itself, how to effectively implement it, and how to educate members on it. 

Pledging PBX is an enjoyable and educational experience which transforms new members in to contributing Brothers and leaders. Through this, pledges learn how their Chapter and national organization work, the many leadership positions, the committee system, how to recruit top-quality new members, risk management, and how to present themselves in both social and professional settings as respectable gentlemen. Each pledge class mimics the structure of their Chapter by having their own Executive Board and committees (like a pledge Brotherhood committee which plans Brotherhood events just for the pledges) so that every pledge obtains real leadership experience even before joining the Chapter. This document details our advanced and exclusive process for building new Chapter leaders.

The health and safety of our members are of utmost concern and consideration. PBX offers numerous resources to promote and sustain healthy habits among our members. Such resources include information, memberships, discounts, and promotions for providers of services and products which encourage strong mental and physical health. This is the list of these offerings and how to utilize them.

Many of our Chapters own or rent their Chapter houses and are responsible for managing them. Property management is a broad term which includes landscaping guidelines, interior maintenance and repair plans, managing house funds and savings, handling security deposits, collecting and making rent and mortgage payments, tenant transition procedures, and understanding lease rules and laws. Property management also includes external affairs such as finding more properties to rent and buy, negotiating rental and purchase agreements, and maintaining positive relationships with our landlords and neighbors. This document contains our strategies and processes for achieving these.

Rush is typically a two week process consisting of numerous events and activities for potential new members to attend and meet our Brothers. These events are casual in nature and can include things like cookouts at the house, lawn games, bowling, paintball, pick-up sports games, order pizza and watch professional sports, etc. This document is a sample Rush calendar which can be circulated around campus physically and digitally. 

Chapters run on a routine schedule every semester with several important events happening at the same point within each semester. Such events include Rush week, bid extensions, initiation, philanthropy fundraisers, social and brotherhood events, educational meetings, document due dates, payment due dates, and more. It is important for these dates to be known at the beginning of each semester so that Chapter leaders and committees can aim to meet them. This document is a calendar for our Chapters to use as a template to guide their work and achievements throughout the semester. Some dates are firm such as payment due dates, and others are flexible such as Philanthropy week.


FAQ's:
How to join a chapter
How to start a chapter
How much are dues
What does PBX offer
What is the pledge process
Do you haze
What do you mean by off campus
are you insured
are you a real org

App q's: 
Name of applicant
applicant phone
applicant email
city
state
school
number of members
were you formerly part of another organization
are you currently part of another organization
what is the purpose of your Chapter
do you have an active exec board
do you have a Chapter house
Chapter mailing address
philanthropy
comm service

rails g scaffold chapter_application applicant_name:string applicant_phone:string applicant_email:string city:string state:string school:string members_num:integer chapter_house:string mailing_address:text active_exec:string exec_positions:text purpose:text why_pbx:text philanthropy:text community_service:text former_org:string former_org_name:string former_org_reason:text

FAQ Answers:
Pi Beta Chi is always looking to expand and promote our Four Pillars with more Brothers. The process to start a new Chapter is straight forward. The first step is to fill out the application here to determine if your group is a good fit. A good fit is a group which is motivated to stand out as a top-tier student organization by dutifully serving their community and philanthropies, and by offering plentiful and meaningful leadership opportunities to its members. A good fit is also averse to hazing. 

The next step is that IHQ will contact you to get more information and to prepare a “Motion of Recognition” to send to our Chapters. A Motion of Recognition is when IHQ formally asks each Chapter to vote on whether or not an applying group should become an official Chapter of Pi Beta Chi. The Motion includes all of the information IHQ has about your group and it makes a case for why you should be voted in. A majority of our Chapters must vote in favor of the Motion for it to pass. 

If the Motion passes, then IHQ will collect your membership roster and prorated dues for the current semester. Next, our legal team will do the following: 1) Create your Chapter as a registered non-profit organization with your State. This is what stops anyone from calling you a “gang” or “underground” since you’ll be chartered with your State as an official and legal organization. 2) Register you with the IRS as a non-profit and get you an EIN number which is like a social security number for organizations. This is what allows you to get an organizational bank account and legally collect dues tax-free. 4) Add your Chapter and members to our insurance policies. This is what allows your members to take leadership positions within the Chapter without exposing them to significant legal liability and risk. 5) Work with your Chapter to create its By-Laws, and then review them for any gaps, loopholes, legal exposures, and to make sure they are compliant with your State’s laws.

Once these are complete, you will officially be a Chapter of Pi Beta Chi. You will receive your Charter and IHQ will work with you to build a Chapter website, recruit new members, manage risk, and successfully run a Chapter. 

Dues to IHQ are $125 per member per semester. Members include both Brothers and pledges so if a Chapter has 60 Brothers and 10 pledges, then that Chapter’s semester dues to IHQ are (60 + 10) x $125 which equals $8,750. These dues are used to pay for insurance, legal costs, savings, and overhead. Pi Beta Chi’s dues are significantly cheaper and simpler than other organizations who charge up to $700 per member and charge several additional fees such as new member fees, inspection fees, and an annual Chapter fee.   

Pi Beta Chi is a NON hazing organization and has zero tolerance for any acts or threats of hazing. No chapter, colony, student or alumnus should conduct, participate in or condone hazing activities. You can read our definition and policy on hazing here. If you or someone has been hazed, may be hazed in the future, or is in any way threatened by hazing, you should call 911 or your local police department immediately. Additionally, you can call a hazing hotline or visit online resources such as hazingprevention.org and stophazing.org.

Our pledge process is an eight week long educational experience which transforms new members in to contributing Brothers and leaders. Through this, pledges learn how their Chapter and national organization work, the many leadership positions, the committee system, how to recruit top-quality new members, risk management, and how to present themselves in both social and professional settings as respectable gentlemen. Each pledge class mimics the structure of their Chapter by having their own Executive Board and committees (like a pledge Brotherhood committee which plans Brotherhood events just for the pledges) so that every pledge obtains real leadership experience even before joining the Chapter.

Yes, Pi Beta Chi has a multimillion dollar insurance policy which covers the national organization, its Chapters, Chapter leaders, Brothers, and pledges. Our policy includes.. 

Pi Beta Chi provides several layers of legal protection for its Chapters. The first layer is by registering every Chapter as an official non-profit organization in the State which it operates in. This provides two main protections:  1) It allows a Chapter to operate without the threat of being called an illegal gang, or “underground”, and potentially targeted by law enforcement and the IRS. Instead, it becomes a lawful organization with an IRS issued tax ID number. 2) It allows our Chapter leaders and members to operate without exposing themselves to significant legal liability. This is because the Chapter becomes its own legal entity liable for its operations. If it weren’t an official legal entity, then the members would be the ones liable for it. In short, now the Chapter is what would be sued instead of the individual members. 

The second layer is the fact that all of our Chapters are their own separate registered non-profit organizations and legal entities, as opposed to just having one legal entity for the national organization and all of the Chapters. This way each Chapter is insulated from any legal troubles of another Chapter and vice versa. If a Chapter is sued, then only that Chapter will be sued instead of all the Chapters. 

The third layer is by maintaining a comprehensive insurance policy that includes legal coverage. This means that if a Chapter is sued, then our insurance provider will furnish attorneys and pay their fees. For example, if a Chapter has a fundraiser and converts their house in to a fake-haunted house for Halloween, and someone breaks their ankle running away from something spooky, and they sue the Chapter, then our insurance provider would take over and handle the legal proceedings, and they would pay any resulting judgments.

The fourth layer of legal protection is by having on retainer a national law firm that specializes in non-profit organizations and liability protection. This firm creates our Chapters, reviews our By-Laws regularly, keeps us in good standing with our State governments and the IRS, and advises us when necessary. 

Each Chapter is its own non-profit organization and is registered as such with the State that they operate in and with the IRS. To be specific, each Chapter is a 501(c)(7) non-profit which is the IRS’ designation for “Social Clubs” that are “organized for pleasure, recreation, and other nonprofitable purposes.” This is the typical designation for Fraternities and Sororities. You can read more about the IRS’ position on 501(c)(7)’s here: https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-tege/eotopicc96.pdf. 

“Tax exempt” is a confusing and often misunderstood term. Let’s break it down. There are several types of non-profit organizations under the IRS. Credit Unions, Churches, Social Welfare organizations, Retirement Funds, HOA’s, and Fraternities, to name just a few, are all different types of non-profits with different regulations from the IRS. One thing that all non-profits have in common is that they are exempt from having to pay federal income tax. So, from that perspective, Fraternities, including Pi Beta Chi, are “tax exempt”. However, when someone asks “is this organization tax exempt?” they are usually asking if they can donate to the organization and write off their donation on their own taxes. Of the several different types of non-profits, only one type, the 501(c)(3) type, allows someone to write off their donations. Fraternities are not this type, and therefore, someone can not donate to us and write off their donation on their taxes. So, from this perspective, we are not “tax exempt”.
